docs/index.rst, before:

*********************************
Welcome to Tombo's documentation!
*********************************

Tombo is a suite of tools primarily for the identification of modified nucleotides from nanopore sequencing data.

Tombo also provides tools for the analysis and visualization of raw nanopore signal.

------------
Installation
------------

|bioconda_badge| |pypi_badge|

.. |bioconda_badge| image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/install%20with-bioconda-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square
    :target: http://bioconda.github.io/recipes/ont-tombo/README.html

.. |pypi_badge| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/ont-tombo.svg
    :target: https://badge.fury.io/py/ont-tombo

Basic tombo installation (python 2.7 and 3.4+ support)

::

    # install via bioconda environment
    conda install -c bioconda ont-tombo

    # or install pip package (numpy install required before tombo for cython optimization)
    pip install numpy
    pip install ont-tombo[full]

See :doc:`examples` for common workflows.

------
Naming
------

Tombo Ahi is a Japanese name for albacore (which is also the Oxford Nanopore Technologies basecaller). So use albacore to identify canonical bases and then use Tombo to detect more exotic, non-canonical bases.

--------
Contents
--------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   examples
   resquiggle
   modified_base_detection
   text_output
   plotting
   filtering
   model_training
   rna

-------------------------
Full API reference (beta)
-------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   tombo

-------------------
Documentation Index
-------------------

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`

Commit message:

Version 1.2.1 release. This release extends the use of dampened-fraction to all commands that take a statistics file. This release adds additional features for analyzing per-read statistics. This release adds extra safegaurds to prevent corruption of read files (Foxes #30). This release also fixes several bugs including truncation of chromsome names in statistics file (fixes #33) and fixes high memory usage in the re-squiggle command (fixes #36) as well as a memory leak when outputting per-read statistics. Several other optimizations and minor bug fixes are also included (for #33 and #34).

docs/index.rst, after:

*********************************
Welcome to Tombo's documentation!
*********************************

Tombo is a suite of tools primarily for the identification of modified nucleotides from nanopore sequencing data.

Tombo also provides tools for the analysis and visualization of raw nanopore signal.

------------
Installation
------------

|bioconda_badge| |pypi_badge|

.. |bioconda_badge| image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/install%20with-bioconda-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square
    :target: http://bioconda.github.io/recipes/ont-tombo/README.html

.. |pypi_badge| image:: https://badge.fury.io/py/ont-tombo.svg
    :target: https://badge.fury.io/py/ont-tombo

Basic tombo installation (python 2.7 and 3.4+ support)

::

    # install via bioconda environment
    conda install -c bioconda ont-tombo

    # or install pip package (numpy install required before tombo for cython optimization)
    pip install numpy
    pip install ont-tombo[full]

See :doc:`examples` for common workflows.

-------------
Documentation
-------------

Run ``tombo -h`` to see all Tombo sub-commands and run ``tombo [sub-command] -h`` to see the options for any Tombo sub-command.

Detailed documentation for all Tombo algorithms and sub-commands can be found through the links here.

------
Naming
------

Tombo Ahi is a Japanese name for albacore (which is also the Oxford Nanopore Technologies basecaller). So use albacore to identify canonical bases and then use Tombo to detect more exotic, non-canonical bases.

--------
Contents
--------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   examples
   resquiggle
   modified_base_detection
   text_output
   plotting
   filtering
   model_training
   rna

-------------------------
Full API reference (beta)
-------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   tombo

-------------------
Documentation Index
-------------------

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
